Sure.
Good afternoon, Claudia.
And I think Gavin is trying to connect as well. I can see.
Yes.
Good afternoon. Uh, good afternoon.
We have 10 minutes with you, so it's your time.
Um, if you would like to start by speaking
to your permission, and if there is any time left,
there might be questions for members. Thank you.
Thank you very much. The Law Association of New Zealand,
uh, is an independent membership body independent
to the law, law society.
Um, thank you for this opportunity to contribute
to law reform and policy development.
Um, I'm Deputy VEA of the anti-money laundering, countering
of financing of Terrorism Committee.
Um, we comprise of senior practitioners,
compliance professionals and in-house council
and members of the independent bar.
Today we're going to talk about three points.
Um, I'm going to discuss, uh, sections 1 55 A
to 1 55 E, which is the proposed levy framework.
Um, my ga, my colleague Gavin, will speak about the
concentration of powers that will lie in the Commission
of Police, as well as the Chief executive of the DIA,
who will be able to make rules without going
through the usual parliamentary scrutiny
and process involved in making regulations.
I'll also discussing, um, which I'll start on, uh,
discussing, uh, clause 21, which are the changes
to section 132.
Um, the committee submits that, um, the
a ML supervisor will have significant powers
and briefly I'll suggest that they'll be able
to require the production of or access of all records
or documents or information from an individual
or reporting entity, as well
as conduct in onsite inspections, um,
which they already have a power to do so under Section 133.
Now, they may do so also by audio or audio visual link.
A new subsection means they could also require person within
with whom the ML supervisor thinks has reasonable knowledge
of a possible breach of the ACT
or regulations to attend a meeting and answer questions.
Now we say these are significant powers
and bearing in mind that the legal profession has, uh,
legal obligations to clients under the Lawyers
and Conveyances Act lawyers conduct
and client care rules, specifically the relationship
between a lawyer and their client is sacrosanct
and one of confidence and trust.
Um, we also say that the subsection at the moment
does make not pay enough cognizance
to the professional obligations lawyers have in relation
to privilege, communication and information.
Now, we are suggesting that, um,
the ML supervisor, D MA does have to provide notice,
but we say the notice should be in writing.
It should also be served in the normal accordance, um, as
how you'd serve, uh, court documents.
Um, sending an email or posting a letter is not sufficient.
We also say that the notice should be quite comprehensive
and specify what power is being exercised,
what the supervisor wants to do, is it, um,
conducting inspection or acquiring and
or requiring documents to be, um, produced.
Also, uh, you know, if the person's required
to answer questions because they may have knowledge
of a possible breach of the act.
And we are saying that it's really important
that the written notice also specifies that the person
has a right not to provide privileged information.
And it should be also, uh, extended,
not privileged communication,
but also privileged information, which at a broader context.
We also are saying that, um, that notice should also specify
that the person does not need to answer any questions
that may result in them self-incrimination.
And we are saying that if written notices served on a
person, they should be given at least seven working days
or by default, which is already in the section
a hundred thirty two ten working days notice.
This will allow the person to seek, uh, legal advice,
at least give them 10 working days
or seven working days to seek legal advice,
particularly since there may be questions of privilege
as well as, um,
answering questions which may result in
incr self-incrimination.
Um, so we've provided some suggested wording.
Um, so the right to inspect, um,
or attend the premises, um, is already in section 132.
We now have section 133 A, which allows inspection
of a dwelling house, which is new.
So this makes it an inspection
of a dwelling house can be done, um, by consent
of the occupier or being served a warrant.
And obviously there won't be any notice in that,
but we are saying in under section 133 inspections notice
should be given in writing and served.
Um, the next points I'll discuss is the levy.
And I guess we have, um,
and you'll see my points in the written submissions.
I won't go in detail. So we've said
that there should be perhaps mandatory exemptions for small
or low risk entities based on using a national risk
assessment to evaluate the entity, um,
strengthen consultation requirements on the levy
and how it may be affecting c certain sectors.
Um, the last thing is enhancing transparency.
I think our members would like to have more information on
what the levy or the revenue generated
by the levy will be used for.
Um, and the reason we say there must be a proportionate, um,
levy, and it must be proportionate
to the risk profile compliance burden
and financial capacity of different sectors
or classes, reporting entities.
If we look at law firms, um,
and as you're aware, lawyers carry out a lot
of different legal services
and in different practice areas, areas,
and they're large, very large number of practice areas
that are actually not prescribed activities
or covered by the A MLC of T act, for instance,
providing trademarks, providing trust law, um, advice, uh,
a beneficiary or trustee needs to
seek advice on the obligations
and duties under the Trust Act.
Um, so the only services that actually covered by um,
M-L-C-F-T-E ACT is conveying managing client funds,
bank accounts, helping a client, selling businesses, uh,
selling shares in a business, selling business assets,
setting up trusts, companies, limited partnerships, acting
as a director trustee, uh, nominee,
a nominee shareholder nominee director,
or providing, um, instructions on behalf of a client in
formation of companies
or any of the other prescribed activities.
But the vast majority of services being provided by lawyers
and law firms, um, are not actually covered
by the M-L-C-F-T Act.
Obviously, lawyers who run trust accounts, um, have
to report monthly to the law society.
So the number of transactions being going through the law,
those trust accounts actually can be monitored.
Um, and they have to keep three detailed records in terms
of their, their cashbook, uh, ledgers and journals.
Any mistakes in any journals
or ledgers need to be reported monthly
through the trust account, uh, professional who needs
to report to law society, even if it's a very minor default
of a journal or ledger.
Um, my colleague Gavin will now submit on, um,
the other point regarding the rulemaking
and the powers vested in the Commissioner of Police
and the, uh, chief Executive of the DIA. Gavin. Thank
You. Thank you very
much for this opportunity.
Um, I'm gonna really focus on clause 32, which
removes, um, well results in the, um,
supervisor and the commercial of police having, um, powers
to make secondary legislation, which, um,
is quite a big step forward.
Um, and whilst to appreciate the reasons behind that, um,
we are concerned about, um, the effect of this.
Um, and I'd just like to say that, um, previously the, uh,
supervisors have been in a position to make, um,
to provide guidance to practitioners
and people caught by the, um, legislation.
Um, and that hasn't always been, in our opinion, um, risk,
uh, based, um, at all.
And there have been certain, um, issues
that have arisen out of that.
The concern is that now that the same body is going
to have the power to make secondary legislation,
which will be binding, not just guidance.
So there is that, um, tension that we are concerned about.
Um, we think that certain aspects of the, um,
powers to make regulations
or certainly the, the areas that, um, rules can be made,
particularly in respect of, um, codes of practice,
um, should have a greater scrutiny
and should be clearly dis uh, allowable instruments.
As far as the parliamentary process is concerned, um, uh,
uh, we need the assurance that these rules
or notices are not going to overstep, um,
or introduce onerous, um, obligations beyond
what the ACT's intent is.
Um, so that's really, uh, our major concern.
Just whilst I'm on the issue of, um, codes
of practice previously there's been ministerial sign off
and ministerial responsibility for codes
of practice under section 64 of the act,
and that's, um, now being removed.
And although the minister has to be consulted on these,
there isn't that, um, level of oversight, which
I think is extremely important.
Um, perhaps not just for codes of practice,
but um, that's where it has been previously, um,
applied. Um,
Given, sorry to interrupt.
Uh, you have around one minute, uh,
less than one, one minute.
If you would like to wrap up your submission, please. Oh,
Yes. Uh, just
to say that there needs to be a,
we propose a wider consultation process, um,
a much wider one
and public notice of rules of intended rules
and with, um, impact statements as well.
I think that, that that's the bare minimum
that we think would be acceptable given the power
that's now in the hands of an unelected, um, body or person.
Um, so I don't really have anything more than that.
Um, it's what we've said is in our submissions, um,
but I think those are, are, are really key issues
that base the legal profession in this area.
Thank you to both of you for your detailed submission.
Uh, that's the time we had for your submission. Thanks
Very much. Thank you.
Next we have Barfoot
and Thompson if they're in their room, please.
Yeah, thank you. In person, which is good.
And I'm not a lawyer either. That's all right.
Um, we are going to be joined by, by Peter Thompson.
Here he is.
Hello all. I'm the Dr.
I I couldn't get to my, uh, branch
and I'm uh, doing it from a car over.
That's alright. Pulled over.
Thank you. Thank you Peter. And thank you Ashley.
We have 10 minutes with you.
Lovely. Thank you. Um, I'm Ashley Henderson.
I'm the a ML Compliance Officer for Barford and Thompson.
Um, I do come with a reasonable background in a ML
compliance, um, for the two largest
real estate companies in New Zealand.
I've been through medi remediation, um, with the DIA, um,
and obviously now work for Barefoot.
And we're joined by Peter Thompson, now managing director.
Um, and thank you very much for your time today.
Um, we will take our written submission dated the
20th of August 25 as read.
However, we present today in a further attempt
to ensure this committee fully understands the implications
of imposing an industry levy on the real estate sector.
Being New Zealand's largest privately owned real estate
company and a reporting entity that is supervised
by the DIA, we can confirm
that on average we complete customer due diligence annually
on approximately 22,000 individuals, 15,000
of which reside in New Zealand.
So being 68% of our clients,
we work on a fully outsourced model where CDD is completed
by a third party provider.
And this costs our clients approximately
$1.5 million annually.
There are the operational costs of staff,
annual staff training and audits.
Barford and Thompson estimates an annual expense
of approximately $2 million in a ML compliance.
The cost of compliance already weighs
heavily on our industry.
Minister Nicole McKee made comments
that the annual a ML summit in Auckland, 8th of May,
that the levy would be targeted to larger organizations so
that smaller businesses weren't carrying
the burden of compliance.
It is our view that this is an unfair assessment.
As larger organizations invest heavily in compliance
and in our experience seek more resources
to ensure a framework of compliance is to a high standard.
Recognizing that real estate transactions are regularly
identified in criminal activity,
we're certainly not shying away from our obligations
or the significant role we play in the regime,
but the following must be considered
risk proportion to our industry.
The national risk assessment remains
unchanged for our sector.
Real estate is already assessed by the DIA
as a compliant sector,
and most importantly,
there must be an adequate targeted sector consultation
should anything further be considered.
The current bill does not provide comfort
that consultation will occur to this extent.
Barfoot and Thompson participate in the Ryan's a ML working
group and we are aware of the policy design
that has been created by the Ministry of Justice
for the national strategy.
We've also provided feedback on this.
While Ryan's represents the industry
and consults on a large number of issues,
we ask the committee to consider
that there are many different business models from small
real estate offices to franchise owned brands
to non-designated business groups, which all come
with their own level of risk
and can be a challenge for Ryans
to wholesomely represent varying opinions.
There are concerns that imposing a levy will incentivize the
industry's business structures, acknowledging that the cost
of compliance does ultimately end up
passed onto our clients.
The other significant consideration is
that real estate can be transacted without real estate
agencies and should clients choose
to trade property privately, this would see the reliance
of quality reporting shift to solicitors and conveyances.
It is our view that based on risks we see in the industry,
it could have a consequence of weakened reporting.
A property sale already has multiple reporting entities
involved in the transaction, real estate agencies,
solicitors, conveyances, and banks.
And in some instances, accountants,
it is a heavily duplicated process.
The government has announced a relaxation
to foreign property investment has consideration
to the A-M-L-C-F-T regime been accounted for,
and can our industry place a reliance on the due diligence
conducted by the overseas investment office to ensure
that we're not opening doors to unsavory transactions?
We see many examples
of the New Zealand companies Register being used
as a vehicle for many offshore shareholdings,
including the British Virgin and Cayman Islands.
This amendment bill needs to recognize
that there are other forms of New Zealand legislation
that can organically influence
and deter money laundering,
encountering financing risks in New Zealand.
This bill requires careful consideration, transparency,
but most importantly targeted sector consultation.
Peter, is there anything else you wish to add?
Thanks, Ashley. And, and I I'm not reading off notes.
I think, uh, I just wanna talk from the heart.
Uh, I am a life member of Real Estate Institute.
Uh, I've been in the industry for 45 years
and it just, you know, I've seen a lot.
I'm also the chair
of the International Global Advisory Board
of leading real estate companies of the world,
which gives us a good opportunity to see
what other countries are doing.
As far as a MLI congratulate you on a ML
and I know the reasons why we're doing it,
and we all want that to succeed.
And putting a levy on to our industry, in my mind,
is not going work
unless it's applied right across the board.
And what I'm talking about here,
and I'm not sure if it's been taken into consideration,
is private sales, private sales
where there's no real estate agency make up around about 10%
of New Zealand sales.
And quite honestly, if there's gonna be an area of concern
with a MLI wonder how quickly
or how closely those sales are actually being visited.
I'm sure you'll come back to me
and say, well, the, uh, vendor solicitor
and the, uh, purchaser solicitor does a ML, they do
that with us as well.
So we are actually gonna be, you know, we've been penalized
because we're a real estate agent versus a, a private sale.
And I think that needs to be taken in consideration.
I think the other thing that we need to look at is,
you know, I think, uh, Ashley sort of raised it,
is the various models
and talking to, uh, around the,
around the, around the world.
One of the important things I'm hearing is most people have
one central database for, uh, a ML, uh, taken,
whether it's from a real estate agent, a lawyer, or,
or some other entity.
And that's something that we've been working with DIA, uh,
over the last several years.
But no traction has been made, you know,
having three different groups doing, uh, a ML,
all those costs have been passed back to the consumer.
And I, I thought the whole idea of this was to try
and reduce costs to the consumer.
The levy I don't think would be passed on the con onto the
consumer, but companies absorb, uh,
quite often will absorb a large part of that cost
that will be passed now on back to the consumer.
And I don't think that's in the best interest.
So I do ask you to really consider about the levy and,
and where it should be spread.
But if it's gonna be a levee put on,
it's gotta go across every, everyone including private sales
and I'm not quite sure how that would be policed.
Um, Ashley, I'll hand back to you.
Thank you. We just wish to thank you for your time
and hope we've provided you with enough information
to make an informed decision that provides scope
to the real estate sector and why imposing a levy in the
real estate sector as not in the best interest
of everyday New Zealanders.
And we're happy to answer any questions
that you may have if there's time. Uh,
Yeah, there is time and there is a question
from Dr. David Wilson.
Uh, thank you Peter and Ashley, is it or Ashley? Ashley.
Ashley. Good name. My son's name.
Um, I have one question
and that is that I heard you recommend
that there should be one central database
and then held with one particular agency rather than the
three that you have at the moment.
Mm-hmm. Can you tell us
what your preferred agency would be and why?
Um, I, I, I suppose the real one
that we were talking about when we first talked about it,
uh, as un under the DIA, uh, sector group was real me,
uh, which, uh, is, is private.
Uh, my, my, I think some of the concern that was shown about
that was it was so many people going onto it,
could there be breaches of security or something?
But the what was uh, planned was maybe using that
as the basis to create, you know,
the a ML on site that only real estate agents, banks,
and solicitors can get into.
Because the repetition of the process from all three
is quite challenging.
Especially when, when, sorry.
Yep. I sub Mentioned we have time. Yep. Very quick.
Um, so which supervisor?
Well, well, whoever, whoever is the first to actually, uh,
receive the inquiry.
Uh, some people come to a, uh, a real estate agent
before they go to the bank.
Okay. Some go to very few go to the lawyers
until the last moment. So
You don't have a preference for F-M-A-D-I
Or no, correct. Yeah.
Yeah. Thank you. Thank you, Ash. Thanks Peter.
Lovely. Thank you very much.
Thank you. We move to private session now. Thank you.
Thank you.